Why Explore Space （1.19更新：原文已附文末。）

1970年，赞比亚修女玛丽·朱坎达致信美国太空总署的恩斯特·史都林格博士。信中，她质问这位当时任职于马歇尔太空飞行中心的科技副总监，这世上还有无数的孩子遭着饥荒的罪，你怎么忍心还要把这么多钱花在研究那火星登陆计划上面？

不久，史都林格博士便写下了以下这封回信，并附上了一张名为“地球升 起”的照片（已附文中），这张照片非常著名，是1968年由宇航员威廉·安德斯从月球所摄而得。美国太空 总署随后以《为什么要探索宇宙》为题，发表了博士这封精心回信。

亲爱的玛丽•朱坎达修女： 我每天都会收到很多来信，但您这封无疑是让我触动最深，只因这番肺腑之言是来自一颗上下求索、悲天悯人之心。我愿尽我所能回答您这个问题。

不过在此之前，我想先对您，还有您身边的众多同僚表示敬意，我衷心敬佩你们把生命无所畏惧地投入到人类最高尚的事业中去——帮助有需要的人。

您在信中问到，这世上还有无数的孩子遭着饥荒的罪，我怎么还忍心要把这么多钱都花在这火星之旅上？我知道您一定不希望得到像下面这种答复“啊，我真不知道有这么多孩子快要被饿死了，得先停止太空研究，待人类先解决这个问题才行。”可以说，其实在我了解到火星之旅在技术上是切实可行之前，我早已意识到孩子们的饥荒问题了。然而我跟我身边的许多朋友都相信，无论是月球火星之行，还是日后各大行星之旅，外太空探索是我们现在就该着手发展的事业。另外，我本人更认为，从长远看，发展火星计划对于解决我们在地球上正面临着的种种严峻问题也大有裨益，比起那些讨论个没完没了，收效却甚慢甚微的资助计划，也来得实际。

就在我详细说明太空计划正如何帮助解决地球上的问题前，我想先简单说一个大概是真实的故事，以或支持我的观点。在大约四百年前的一个德国小镇上住了一位伯爵，他是个善良人，总把自己大部分俸禄捐给镇上的穷人。在那个饥寒交逼的中世纪年代，常见疫病横行，家园尽毁，因此伯爵的无私之行得到众人的敬仰。有一天，他碰见了一位陌生男人，在其家中，除了一个工作台外，还有一个小小的实验室。男人白天拼命工作，就是想每晚留上几个小时可以待在自己的实验室里。他把玻璃打磨成小镜片，然后把镜片安到管子里，然后用这玩意去观察些细微的东西。在这高倍数的放大之下，伯爵看到了一些他以前从未见过的微型生物，他对此颇为着迷。随后他便邀请这位男子连同其实验室搬进自己的城堡，男子从此成了伯爵家的一员，并以特殊雇员的身份全身心投入到其光学设备的研究及完善工作中去了。

然而，镇上的人得知此事后都不禁愤怒了，他们认为伯爵居然把钱都浪费在一些只能唬弄人的把戏上面，他们嚷道：“我们还遭着这瘟疫的罪，他却把钱花在那男人不顶用的爱好上！”面对种种质疑，伯爵依然很坚定，他回答道：“我还是会尽力帮助你们，但同时我也会继续支持那位男子及其工作，因为我知道终有一天这会为我们带来什么。

的确，这男子的工作，以及其他人所作出的类似努力为我们带来了一样宝贝——显微镜。众所周知，比起其他的一些发明，显微镜的诞生可谓大大推进了医学的发展。没有显微镜，相关微观医学研究就不能进行，也就很可能没有瘟疫及其他传染性疾病在地球上大面积灭绝的今天。

那位伯爵，就减轻人类所遭之罪而言，就算是把所有可以捐的都捐给了他身边那些为瘟疫所折磨的人们，也远远比不上仅拨出一笔钱来资助那位男子的研究。

其实，这跟我们今天所要面对的情况在很多方面是类似的。我们的美国总统提交了一份两千亿美元的年度预算，这笔钱将投入到医疗、教育、福利、城市翻新、公路建设、交通运输、对外援助、国防军备、生态维持、科学研究、农业发展以及大量国内外设施建设中去。在今年的国家预算中，约1.6%的资金会拨到太空探索这面来，以支持阿波罗计划，及其他一些规模较小的项目，如空间物理学、空间天文学、太空生物学、行星工程、地球资源工程和航天工程。对于平均年收入为10000美元的美国纳税者来说，他们每个人每年要为空间计划贡献30美元，剩下的9970美元，他们将用以维持自己的生活，或娱乐消遣，或存进银行，还有支付其他税款与花销。

你也许会问“那为什么不从那30美元中拿出5美元，3美元，乃至1美元出来帮助那些挨饿的孩子呢？”对此，我想先简单介绍一下我们国家的经济运作模式，其实这与许多国家也很类似。我们的政府由内阁部门（内政部、司法部、卫生部、教育与福利部、运输部、国防部等）与各机构（国家科学基金会、太空总署等）组成，它们根据所分配任务提交年度预算，国会委员会将对此进行严格的把关，预算局与总统也会就经济效率施以重压。当资金最终从国会批下来以后，这笔钱也只能用于预算案中明细规定的所批项目。

很自然，太空总署的预算案中只能包含与航空事业直接相关的项目，如果此预算案被拒，其所求资金也不会用作他途。除非其他部门预算案中有追加预算被批下，从而获得这笔原用于空间研究的款项，否则事情其实很简单，这笔钱就直接不用向纳税人征收了。通过以上说明，相信您应该能了解到，对于资助饥饿儿童一事，只能是由相关负责部门将其纳入预算案，并经国会批准才能实行。而事实上，我们国家已经在以对外援助的方式，在其他方面为这一崇高事业作出努力。

读到这，你也许会问，如果美国政府真的去资助饥饿儿童，我个人是否赞成？我可以告诉您，我是绝对的百分百赞成。倘若政府为了资助各地饥饿儿童而增加我们的税收，我是一点都不会介意的，我相信我身边的朋友也会如此认为，但是，我们不能仅靠搁置火星之旅，就能实现这个资助计划。相反，我认为，我们在太空计划上所作出的努力，会有助缓解甚至最终解决贫穷、饥饿等严峻问题。造成饥饿问题的根本原因有二：粮食产量不等与粮食分配不均。种植业、牧业、渔业及其他大规模作业在某些区域粮食出产率很高，但在很多地区却非常的低。但其实，打个譬方，如果这有一块广袤的土地，倘若我们能采取一系列有效措施，诸如流域治理、肥料应用、气象预警、地力评估、种植园规建、区位优选、因地制宜、因时制宜、估产规收，其实这块土地是可以被充分利用起来的，粮食产量也会相应得到飞跃式增长。

要实现改进上述种种措施，人造地球卫星无疑便是最佳工具。人造卫星在高空飞行，从而能在短时间内对地面进行大范围拍摄。对于有关作物状态、土壤状况、干旱程度、降水量、冰雪覆盖率等的一系列指标要素，它也能自行进行观察测量，并将相关信息以无线电形式返回地面接收站以作他用。在一个全球农业改进项目之中，据估计，就一个一般规模的地球资源卫星系统，就可以为我们带来价值数十亿美元的作物年增收。

对有需要人群进行粮食分配又是一个截然不同的问题。此问题与粮食运输量没有多大关系，关键是在于国际间合作。试想，倘若一个小国长期向一个大国进口粮食，那位小国的首脑该得坐立不安了，不为什么，只是因为随进口而来的，不仅仅是粮食，还有他国势力在本土的影响。及此，我真恐怕，若要有效解决饥饿问题，非要等到国界线不再清晰的那一天不可，我也不认为发展航天事业会让此奇迹瞬间实现。不过，我相信，在朝着这个方向所作出的各种努力之中，空间计划定必是最有前景、最有份量的。

我想再跟你谈谈最近的阿波罗13号，就是那一次差点就酿成悲剧的登月飞行任务。记得当时，我们的宇航员们正要重返大气层，就在这紧要关头，苏联当局为了避免任何信号干扰的可能性，中断了其所有与阿波罗计划所用频带相同的无线电传输，并派遣船舰到太平洋和大西洋去，万一发生紧急情况都能及时施与援手。我想，如果我们的宇航员舱是在一艘俄方船舰附近着陆的话，他们定会尽力帮助我们的人，就好像对待自己刚从太空回来的同胞一般。我们也一样，倘若俄方宇航员遭到类似情况，我们也必定义无反顾地帮助他们。

太空计划对人类在地球上的生活有着深远影响，来自地球卫星的测量评估有助于粮食增产，其所促进的国际关系也有利于粮食分配的完善。但可以说，其影响远远不止这两点。我下面要说的，是另外两例，即刺激技术发展和酝酿科学知识。

旅月飞行器的部件制造对技术准绳度与可靠度要求之高，在整个工程学发展史上都是前所未见的。为了满足这严苛的技术要求，我们不断发展整个科学体系，与此同时，我们更寻找新材料新方法、革新技术体系、完善制造工序、延长仪器寿命、乃至发现新的自然规律。

这些技术层面上的新知，其实同样可用于非航天科技上去。每年，大约就有一千项始于空间计划的技术发明会被用于非航天领域，这为我们带来了更好的厨具、农具、餐具、缝纫机、收音机、以及其他日常工具；更可靠的船只飞机；更精准的天气预报与风暴预警；更无阻的通信系统；更先进的医学仪器等。读到这，你也许会问，为什么我们非先要为旅月宇航员把生命维持系统研制出来，才去为心脏病人制造遥读传感系统？答案很简单，因为在解决技术难题的过程中，一些重大进展的取得通常不是靠直接着手研究，而是靠设下一个极具挑战性的目标。这个目标予人以强大动力去进行创新性研究，从而激起人们的想象力，并鼓舞其作出最大的努力，这目标就如同催化剂般，为科学的发展掀起了连锁反应。

毋庸置疑，航天事业正正是在扮演着这个催化剂角色。火星之旅的确不能为饥饿人口直接提供粮食资助，但它会为我们带来许多新技术、新技能，此太空计划中每一个单元小项的价值也因此数倍于其执行费用。

要改善人类的生存状况，我们不仅需要新技术，还需要不断酝酿基础科学领域的新知，如物理、化学、生物、生理、尤其是医学知识，来应对一系列威胁着人类生存的问题，诸如饥饿、疾病、粮食与饮用水污染、环境污染。

我们需要有更多的年轻人投身于科学事业，也需要给予那些有才华、有志向的科学家以更多的支持，他们的研究将会为我们带来累累硕果。另外，我们的研究对象也需要具有挑战性，而外界的支持更不可或缺。我想重申一遍，空间计划为我们提供了不少好机会，让我们能真正地在卫星、行星、物理、天文、生物和医学等领域展开大型研究；空间计划更让科学研究的动力、探秘自然的兴奋、及物质的支持三者彼此促进，最大化其效益。

空间计划尽管只占国家总预算的1.6%，国民生产总值的千分之三，但它在美国政府所辖所资的全部项目中，无疑是最受关注，也很可能是最惹争议的。但就推动新技术发展及基础科学领域研究来看，其他项目根本无法与之媲美。但可悲的是，在未来的三、四千年里，空间计划可能还是要继续跟这些其他项目纠缠下去。

倘若国与国之间的竞争，不是去比较有多少轰炸机与火箭炮，而是去比较有多少艘太空飞船，那该有多少苦难就此避免！这种竞争，才会为我们带来美好的希望与辉煌的胜利。在这场竞争之中，不见被征服者之命途多舛，也就不见旧仇新战。

太空计划仿佛会在把我们领出地球，奔向日月，最后遨游在各大行星、恒星之上，但我相信，就算是对于从事太空研究的科学家来说，我们的地球比起其他任何一个星体，都更值得关注与研究。我们会用新的科技知识来改善人类生活的质量，我们会对地球、生命、及自身更为了解与尊重，及此，我们的地球会变得更好。

随信寄出的那一张照片，上面的地球是1968年圣诞节阿波罗8号绕月运行时所拍下的。时至今天，太空计划已取得了很多非凡成就，但也许没有一样比这张照片来得更重要，它不仅拓宽了我们的视野，还让我们知道，我们的地球是如此的美丽珍贵，就像一个孤岛，被无尽、死寂的虚空所包围，我们仅赖以生存的，只有这星球那脆薄的外壳。没有这张照片，就不会有这么多人意识到地球真的如此有限，生态失衡的后果也将会何其严重。自这张图片发表以来，就警惕污染、饥饿、贫穷、城市人居、粮食生产、水体治理及人口过剩等严峻问题的呼声也此起彼伏、越演越烈。这个时代，是一个年轻的太空时代，它让我们首睹了地球的芳容，那我们开始想到要为它解决种种困难，也绝非偶然。

非常幸运的是，这太空时代不仅给了我们一面镜子以自鉴，还予以我们崭新的科技、巨大的挑战、奋斗的动力乃至乐观的态度，让我们满怀信心地去应对各种困难。我认为，我们对太空计划的所感所悟，充分印证了艾伯特•史怀哲的那句话“我对未来甚是担忧，却又心存希望。”

在此，我向您还有您的孩子们送上最诚挚的祝福。

恩斯特•史都林格 谨上 1970年5月6日 ========================= 原文： Why Explore Space?

In 1970, a Zambia-based nun named Sister Mary Jucunda wrote to Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, then-associate director of science at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, in response to his ongoing research into a piloted mission to Mars. Specifically, she asked how he could suggest spending billions of dollars on such a project at a time when so many children were starving on Earth. Stuhlinger soon sent the following letter of explanation to Sister Jucunda, along with a copy of "Earthrise," the iconic photograph of Earth taken in 1968 by astronaut William Anders, from the Moon (also embedded in the transcript). His thoughtful reply was later published by NASA, and titled, "Why Explore Space?" (Source: Roger Launius, via Gavin Williams; Photo above: The surface of Mars, taken by Curiosity today, August 6th, 2012. Via NASA.)

May 6, 1970 Dear Sister Mary Jucunda: Your letter was one of many which are reaching me every day, but it has touched me more deeply than all the others because it came so much from the depths of a searching mind and a compassionate heart. I will try to answer your question as best as I possibly can. First, however, I would like to express my great admiration for you, and for all your many brave sisters, because you are dedicating your lives to the noblest cause of man: help for his fellowmen who are in need. You asked in your letter how I could suggest the expenditures of billions of dollars for a voyage to Mars, at a time when many children on this Earth are starving to death. I know that you do not expect an answer such as "Oh, I did not know that there are children dying from hunger, but from now on I will desist from any kind of space research until mankind has solved that problem!" In fact, I have known of famined children long before I knew that a voyage to the planet Mars is technically feasible. However, I believe, like many of my friends, that travelling to the Moon and eventually to Mars and to other planets is a venture which we should undertake now, and I even believe that this project, in the long run, will contribute more to the solution of these grave problems we are facing here on Earth than many other potential projects of help which are debated and discussed year after year, and which are so extremely slow in yielding tangible results. Before trying to describe in more detail how our space program is contributing to the solution of our Earthly problems, I would like to relate briefly a supposedly true story, which may help support the argument. About 400 years ago, there lived a count in a small town in Germany. He was one of the benign counts, and he gave a large part of his income to the poor in his town. This was much appreciated, because poverty was abundant during medieval times, and there were epidemics of the plague which ravaged the country frequently. One day, the count met a strange man. He had a workbench and little laboratory in his house, and he labored hard during the daytime so that he could afford a few hours every evening to work in his laboratory. He ground small lenses from pieces of glass; he mounted the lenses in tubes, and he used these gadgets to look at very small objects. The count was particularly fascinated by the tiny creatures that could be observed with the strong magnification, and which he had never seen before. He invited the man to move with his laboratory to the castle, to become a member of the count's household, and to devote henceforth all his time to the development and perfection of his optical gadgets as a special employee of the count. The townspeople, however, became angry when they realized that the count was wasting his money, as they thought, on a stunt without purpose. "We are suffering from this plague," they said, "while he is paying that man for a useless hobby!" But the count remained firm. "I give you as much as I can afford," he said, "but I will also support this man and his work, because I know that someday something will come out of it!" Indeed, something very good came out of this work, and also out of similar work done by others at other places: the microscope. It is well known that the microscope has contributed more than any other invention to the progress of medicine, and that the elimination of the plague and many other contagious diseases from most parts of the world is largely a result of studies which the microscope made possible. The count, by retaining some of his spending money for research and discovery, contributed far more to the relief of human suffering than he could have contributed by giving all he could possibly spare to his plague-ridden community. The situation which we are facing today is similar in many respects. The President of the United States is spending about 200 billion dollars in his yearly budget. This money goes to health, education, welfare, urban renewal, highways, transportation, foreign aid, defense, conservation, science, agriculture and many installations inside and outside the country. About 1.6 percent of this national budget was allocated to space exploration this year. The space program includes Project Apollo, and many other smaller projects in space physics, space astronomy, space biology, planetary projects, Earth resources projects, and space engineering. To make this expenditure for the space program possible, the average American taxpayer with 10,000 dollars income per year is paying about 30 tax dollars for space. The rest of his income, 9,970 dollars, remains for his subsistence, his recreation, his savings, his other taxes, and all his other expenditures. You will probably ask now: "Why don't you take 5 or 3 or 1 dollar out of the 30 space dollars which the average American taxpayer is paying, and send these dollars to the hungry children?" To answer this question, I have to explain briefly how the economy of this country works. The situation is very similar in other countries. The government consists of a number of departments (Interior, Justice, Health, Education and Welfare, Transportation, Defense, and others)

and the bureaus (National Science Foundation, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and others). All of them prepare their yearly budgets according to their assigned missions, and each of them must defend its budget against extremely severe screening by congressional committees, and against heavy pressure for economy from the Bureau of the Budget and the President. When the funds are finally appropriated by Congress, they can be spent only for the line items specified and approved in the budget. The budget of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, naturally, can contain only items directly related to aeronautics and space. If this budget were not approved by Congress, the funds proposed for it would not be available for something else; they would simply not be levied from the taxpayer, unless one of the other budgets had obtained approval for a specific increase which would then absorb the funds not spent for space. You realize from this brief discourse that support for hungry children, or rather a support in addition to what the United States is already contributing to this very worthy cause in the form of foreign aid, can be obtained only if the appropriate department submits a budget line item for this purpose, and if this line item is then approved by Congress. You may ask now whether I personally would be in favor of such a move by our government. My answer is an emphatic yes. Indeed, I would not mind at all if my annual taxes were increased by a number of dollars for the purpose of feeding hungry children, wherever they may live. I know that all of my friends feel the same way. However, we could not bring such a program to life merely by desisting from making plans for voyages to Mars. On the contrary, I even believe that by working for the space program I can make some contribution to the relief and eventual solution of such grave problems as poverty and hunger on Earth. Basic to the hunger problem are two functions: the production of food and the distribution of food. Food production by agriculture, cattle ranching, ocean fishing and other large-scale operations is efficient in some parts of the world, but drastically deficient in many others. For example, large areas of land could be utilized far better if efficient methods of watershed control, fertilizer use, weather forecasting, fertility assessment, plantation programming, field selection, planting habits, timing of cultivation, crop survey and harvest planning were applied. The best tool for the improvement of all these functions, undoubtedly, is the artificial Earth satellite. Circling the globe at a high altitude, it can screen wide areas of land within a short time; it can observe and measure a large variety of factors indicating the status and condition of crops, soil, droughts, rainfall, snow cover, etc., and it can radio this information to ground stations for appropriate use. It has been estimated that even a modest system of Earth satellites equipped with Earth resources, sensors, working within a program for worldwide agricultural improvements, will increase the yearly crops by an equivalent of many billions of dollars. The distribution of the food to the needy is a completely different problem. The question is not so much one of shipping volume, it is one of international cooperation. The ruler of a small nation may feel very uneasy about the prospect of having large quantities of food shipped into his country by a large nation, simply because he fears that along with the food there may also be an import of influence and foreign power. Efficient relief from hunger, I am afraid, will not come before the boundaries between nations have become less divisive than they are today. I do not believe that space flight will accomplish this miracle over night. However, the space program is certainly among the most promising and powerful agents working in this direction. Let me only remind you of the recent near-tragedy of Apollo 13. When the time of the crucial reentry of the astronauts approached, the Soviet Union discontinued all Russian radio transmissions in the frequency bands used by the Apollo Project in order to avoid any possible interference, and Russian ships stationed themselves in the Pacific and the Atlantic Oceans in case an emergency rescue would become necessary. Had the astronaut capsule touched down near a Russian ship, the Russians would undoubtedly have expended as much care and effort in their rescue as if Russian cosmonauts had returned from a space trip. If Russian space travelers should ever be in a similar emergency situation, Americans would do the same without any doubt. Higher food production through survey and assessment from orbit, and better food distribution through improved international relations, are only two examples of how profoundly the space program will impact life on Earth. I would like to quote two other examples: stimulation of technological development, and generation of scientific knowledge. The requirements for high precision and for extreme reliability which must be imposed upon the components of a moon-travelling spacecraft are entirely unprecedented in the history of engineering. The development of systems which meet these severe requirements has provided us a unique opportunity to find new material and methods, to invent better technical systems, to manufacturing procedures, to lengthen the lifetimes of instruments, and even to discover new laws of nature. All this newly acquired technical knowledge is also available for application to Earth-bound technologies. Every year, about a thousand technical innovations generated in the space program find their ways into our Earthly technology where they lead to better kitchen appliances and farm equipment, better sewing machines and radios, better ships and airplanes, better weather forecasting and storm warning, better communications, better medical instruments, better utensils and tools for everyday life. Presumably, you will ask now why we must develop first a life support system for our moon-travelling astronauts, before we can build a remote-reading sensor system for heart patients. The answer is simple: significant progress in the solutions of technical problems is frequently made not by a direct approach, but by first setting a goal of high challenge which offers a strong motivation for innovative work, which fires the imagination and spurs men to expend their best efforts, and which acts as a catalyst by including chains of other reactions. Spaceflight without any doubt is playing exactly this role. The voyage to Mars will certainly not be a direct source of food for the hungry. However, it will lead to so many new technologies and capabilities that the spin-offs from this project alone will be worth many times the cost of its implementation. Besides the need for new technologies, there is a continuing great need for new basic knowledge in the sciences if we wish to improve the conditions of human life on Earth. We need more knowledge in physics and chemistry, in biology and physiology, and very particularly in medicine to cope with all these problems which threaten man's life: hunger, disease, contamination of food and water, pollution of the environment. We need more young men and women who choose science as a career and we need better support for those scientists who have the talent and the determination to engage in fruitful research work. Challenging research objectives must be available, and sufficient support for research projects must be provided. Again, the space program with its wonderful opportunities to engage in truly magnificent research studies of moons and planets, of physics and astronomy, of biology and medicine is an almost ideal catalyst which induces the reaction between the motivation for scientific work, opportunities to observe exciting phenomena of nature, and material support needed to carry out the research effort. Among all the activities which are directed, controlled, and funded by the American government, the space program is certainly the most visible and probably the most debated activity, although it consumes only 1.6 percent of the total national budget, and 3 per mille (less than one-third of 1 percent)

of the gross national product. As a stimulant and catalyst for the development of new technologies, and for research in the basic sciences, it is unparalleled by any other activity. In this respect, we may even say that the space program is taking over a function which for three or four thousand years has been the sad prerogative of wars. How much human suffering can be avoided if nations, instead of competing with their bomb-dropping fleets of airplanes and rockets, compete with their moon-travelling space ships!

This competition is full of promise for brilliant victories, but it leaves no room for the bitter fate of the vanquished, which breeds nothing but revenge and new wars. Although our space program seems to lead us away from our Earth and out toward the moon, the sun, the planets, and the stars, I believe that none of these celestial objects will find as much attention and study by space scientists as our Earth. It will become a better Earth, not only because of all the new technological and scientific knowledge which we will apply to the betterment of life, but also because we are developing a far deeper appreciation of our Earth, of life, and of man. The photograph which I enclose with this letter shows a view of our Earth as seen from Apollo 8 when it orbited the moon at Christmas, 1968. Of all the many wonderful results of the space program so far, this picture may be the most important one. It opened our eyes to the fact that our Earth is a beautiful and most precious island in an unlimited void, and that there is no other place for us to live but the thin surface layer of our planet, bordered by the bleak nothingness of space. Never before did so many people recognize how limited our Earth really is, and how perilous it would be to tamper with its ecological balance. Ever since this picture was first published, voices have become louder and louder warning of the grave problems that confront man in our times: pollution, hunger, poverty, urban living, food production, water control, overpopulation. It is certainly not by accident that we begin to see the tremendous tasks waiting for us at a time when the young space age has provided us the first good look at our own planet. Very fortunately though, the space age not only holds out a mirror in which we can see ourselves, it also provides us with the technologies, the challenge, the motivation, and even with the optimism to attack these tasks with confidence. What we learn in our space program, I believe, is fully supporting what Albert Schweitzer had in mind when he said: "I am looking at the future with concern, but with good hope." My very best wishes will always be with you, and with your children. Very sincerely yours, Ernst Stuhlinger Associate Director for Science
